# micromitigation//Micromitigation: Introduction to Volatile Organic Compound Adsorption in Ambient Air using Activated Carbon

   The threat to human health posed by Volatile Organic Compounds- carcinogenic substances for which the EPA has set no safe threshold exposure levels- is significant and under-appreciated. Despite national or state air quality standards, and greatly improved air quality monitoring, local enforcement remains the weak link in remediating hazardous pollutant levels. Stakeholders essentially play whack-a-mole with local hotspot violations. We propose a local technical solution to lessen the immediate effects of pollutants. 

   Micromitigation, also referred to as open panel adsorption, uses adsorption technology for the mitigation of ambient air pollution, by placing small screened panels of commodity granulated activated carbon in polluted locations. After pollutants are adsorbed, the panels are desorbed, the contaminants incinerated, and the material is reactivated. This citizen science initiative seeks to establish an open-source protocol to abate VOC air pollution, and disseminate it by CERN Open Hardware License (Permissive, 2020 v2), or a similar license. The Micromitigation Working Group, a bi-monthly Meetup hosted since April 2021 by the open science Counter Culture Laboratories in Oakland, California, is developing this method.

Science and Technology of Adsorption
   Adsorption (physiosorption), in which process gases are taken in but not chemically combined with the substrate they interact with, is canonical in chemical engineering. Adsorption ranges from the mundane (silica gel in clothing boxes; activated charcoal in fish tanks) to molecular separation in chemical, natural gas, petroleum, and food industries. Spent carbon desorption and reactivation is carried out at regulated reactivation facilities, by thermal oxidation and thermal desorption in a rotary kiln, destroying the VOCs and gases by pyrolysis.

Challenges and Strategy in Maximizing Adsorption in Passive Ambient Air Designs
   Adsorption systems typically use closed reactor beds  and a closely controlled and specified cubic feet per minute inlet to hasten mass transfer to breakthrough (saturation and dynamic equilibrium).  Yet the mixing ratio of ambient air is erratic and idiosyncratic, affected by vehicle traffic and nearby stationary sources. Moreover, relative humidity and temperature vary- and outside of a highly temperate range less than 50% relative humidity, this will affect adsorption. Granulated AC can adsorb a great variety of air pollutants, but conditions which will facilitate this process in ambient air have not been established. Designing a simple adsorption system for ambient air is faced with the issue of diffusion in the low partial pressure of pollutants in ambient air. How will results be achieved with the characteristic lower concentrations and pressure of ambient air, even heavily polluted ambient air? 

   The MMWG is testing three strategies to adsorb effectively and economically in ambient air. The first is repeated flows to the adsorbent material, achieving saturation over a much longer duration. Adsorption does not saturate most AC materials. Thus, we wish to see if repeated adsorption instances won't either. The empirical reality of AQ incidents is in most cases intermittent episodes of high pollution, often acute, but of short duration. The second strategy is deployment locations carefully chosen in order to maximize persistent and episodic acute air pollutant concentrations. Finally, our pilot design increases the adsorbent surface area even further by designing panels open to the air.
 
   We use placement in strategically chosen locations where pollutants are especially dense, or where air flow is laminar (because of impermeable adjacent vertical walls for instance) to facilitate adsorption. This design thus alternately utilizes the relatively passive diffusion of batch adsorption systems, and effusion under pressure used by the more prevalent tubular or plug flow or column reactor adsorption system.  
Initial Pilot and Laboratory Testing 
   Our initial experiment used adsorption panels, screened containers of 4x8 mesh coconut-shell AC, with a high surface area exposed to ambient air, and rely on repeated instances of adsorption of temporarily high readings of a wide variety of gas pollutants.  Panels were placed in high-VOC and vehicle emissions locations at the Counter Culture Lab’s location at the Omni Commons in Oakland’s Temescal neighborhood, and in San Francisco.

   The first sample of the adsorbed AC, from a six-lane arterial street near the intersection of Alemany Boulevard and Habitat Terrace in San Francisco, was tested at an analytical laboratory by GC-MS analysis through thermal desorption (TD GC-MS), using a modified EPA Method TO-17 protocol.  The results indicated significant hydrocarbons, although we realize that we did not specify desorption at a sufficiently high temperature to desorb the VOCs at a higher Celsius.  Yet even these preliminary desorption reports indicate that passive ambient adsorption over a period of time does work.  The GAC was not blinded by PM 2.5 nor did competition from adsorbed H20 preclude adsorption of VOCs.      There are many potential avenues of improvement by which the process may be bettered, and we are trying to figure out how to obtain such results economically.  To determine how rapidly breakthrough occurs, we are carrying out timed tests of AC sorbent material in glass jar, with VOC-saturated air, with a Photo-Ionization Detector.   
Ongoing Institutional Development and Plans for Distributed Experiments     Atmospheric chemistry and air transport questions will require expert consultation and repeated experimentation into reproducibility of results. The MMWG now includes a San Francisco State University chemistry professor and a UC Davis laboratory manager. We welcome community groups, students and teachers, engineers, atmospheric chemists, and chemical engineers to join us.  We look forward to the technological and organizational challenges ahead: it is still early days.  
